why? (#4)
NLnetLabs/rotonda-doc: manual/source/why.rst

Why does this exist?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Central to Rotonda is the observation that there is no one-size-fits-all
application for a network's BGP routing needs any more. As networks are
growing, so is their complexity, and as a consequence, BGP is being used in
more places in the network, and it has turned into a generic container for
information about network nodes, increasing its complexity. Pressure on BGP to
offer better security further increased the complexity of BGP itself and its
deployments.

> By now, the notion of a 'BGP speaker' (the wording of RFC4271) with a fixed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By now, the notion of a 'BGP speaker' (the wording of :RFC:`4271`) with a fixed
```

set of 'Routing Information Bases' (RIBs) with prescribed behaviour is only
one of many different "BGP functions", as we would like to call them, that we
can identify in a network. Rotonda aims to provide users with the building
blocks to create their own application optimized for any of these BGP
functions.

BGP Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

So, what are these BGP functions anyway? The way we would like to describe them
is "a specialised task within a network relying on BGP, that requires a
subset of BGP's features". Often, this task is performed by a node in the
network.

BGP's Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before we delve deeper into BGP functions, let's first establish what we mean
with BGP's features, by posing the question: "What are the

> requirements for a fully-fledged BGP speaker?". RFC4271 and its updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requirements for a fully-fledged BGP speaker?". :RFC:`4271` and its updates
```

> requirements for a fully-fledged BGP speaker?". RFC4271 and its updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requirements for a fully-fledged BGP speaker?". :RFC:`4271` and its updates
```

describes BGP consisting of three components: the BGP packet format, the BGP
state machine, and the Routing Information Base.

The specific required interaction of these components describe BGP's features,
they boil down to:

"Listening", a.k.a "passively speaking" BGP
    - parsing BGP packets
    - opening and maintaining sessions with the BGP state machine

    This is the least amount of work a BGP function would need to do in order
    to be accepted as a functioning part of a network routed with BGP.

Keeping State in RIBs called
    - `adj-RIB-in-pre/post`,
    - `loc-RIB`

>     - `adj-RIB-out`

Reviewer: Do you intend this to be italic or monospace red text? If you wanted the latter, you need a double backtick, i.e. ``adj-RIB-out``

Author: If it's up to me I would say italic

application to be an IETF standards compliant "BGP Speaker". As we stated
before, though, a BGP function does not have to implement all of them to
fulfil their function. Even more so, for them to function correctly, they
don't have to be standards-compliant for all these features.

It would be nice if the first feature, "speaking passively", is implemented
completely standards-compliant, since it would hamper the interaction with
other BGP speakers if wasn't compliant. Since it is valid for a BGP speaker to
have a (local) policy in place that discards all routes to `adj-RIB-out`, a
BGP speaker that never propagates any route could still be
standards-compliant. From that, it follows that such a BGP speaker will not
have to engage in best-path selection, and in turn, it wouldn't have to do any
state-keeping. Strictly speaking, it would at that point not be
standards-compliant any more, but there would be no way for an outside
observer to establish its non-compliance. We shall see that many a BGP
function does indeed not require one or both of the "Keeping state" or
"Speaking" features, hence the word "subset" in our definition.

Route Server
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A Route Server (as mentioned in RFC7947) would be a clear-cut example of a BGP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Route Server (as mentioned in :RFC:`7947`) would be a clear-cut example of a BGP
```

function. A Route Server requires the 'Speaking' features of the BGP protocol
and the BGP state machine, but it does not require the best-path selection

> mechanism, at least not in the form mentioned in RFC4271 and its updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mechanism, at least not in the form mentioned in :RFC:`4271` and its updates.
```

Route Reflector
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Likewise, a Route Reflector (RFC4456) serves a specific function in an iBGP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Likewise, a Route Reflector (:RFC:`4456`) serves a specific function in an iBGP
```

network. Again, it requires the 'Speaking' features of the BGP protocol, but
it doesn't have to engage necessarily in best-path selection. Very simple
Route Reflectors would not have a need for RIBs, they would just reflect the
announcements and withdrawals they receive to their iBGP peers.

Route Collector
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A Route Collector is, broadly speaking, a device that passively engages in BGP
sessions with the purpose of storing the learned routes together with
meta-data about the whereabouts of these routes. Some of the purposes of
storing these routes would be troubleshooting, and (longitudinal) analysis.

"Engaging passively" may mean that the collector wil connect over BMP (BGP
Monitoring Protocol), out-of-band, with one or more BGP routers. In this case

> the collector, called a 'BMP Station' (RFC7854), will **not** be a node in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the collector, called a 'BMP Station' (:RFC:`7854`), will **not** be a node in the
```

BGP network. It will only require the packet parsing features of BGP in order
to be able to extract the routes, and to be able to gather metadata. 

More commonly, though, Route Collectors **are** a node in the BGP network and
the collector tries to "speak passively". As we saw, though, a passive speaker
will have to engage in a minimum of speaking BGP. A Route Collector must never
engage in best-path selection, or propagate routes to its peers whatsoever.
Therefore, Route Collectors have no need for keeping state in RIBs as

> described in RFC4271. Indeed, Route Collectors may entirely forego having

Reviewer: ```suggestion
described in :RFC:`4271`. Indeed, Route Collectors may entirely forego having
```

Why does this exist?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Central to Rotonda is the observation that there is no one-size-fits-all

> application for a network's BGP routing needs any more. As networks are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
application for a network's BGP routing needs anymore. As networks are
```

> growing, so is their complexity, and as a consequence BGP is being used in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
growing, so is their complexity, and as a consequence, BGP is being used in
```

> more places in the network and it has turned into a generic container for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more places in the network, and it has turned into a generic container for
```

information about network nodes, increasing its complexity. Pressure on BGP to
offer better security further increased the complexity of BGP itself and its
deployments.

By now, the notion of a 'BGP speaker' (the wording of RFC4271) with a fixed
set of 'Routing Information Bases' (RIBs) with prescribed behaviour is only
one of many different "BGP functions", as we would like to call them, that we
can identify in a network. Rotonda aims to provide users with the building
blocks to create their own application optimized for any of these BGP
functions.

BGP Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> So what are these BGP functions anyway? The way we would like to describe them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, what are these BGP functions anyway? The way we would like to describe them
```

> So what are these BGP functions anyway? The way we would like to describe them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, what are these BGP functions anyway? The way we would like to describe them
```

> is "a specialized task within a network relying on BGP, that requires a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is "a specialised task within a network relying on BGP, that requires a
```

> sub-set of BGP's features". Often this task is performed by a node in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subset of BGP's features". Often, this task is performed by a node in the
```

> sub-set of BGP's features". Often this task is performed by a node in the

Reviewer 2: "sub-set" -> "subset" ? https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/subset

network.

BGP's Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before we delve deeper into BGP functions, let's first establish what we mean

> with BGP's features, by posing ourselves the question: "What are the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with BGP's features by posing the question: "What are the
```

requirements for a fully-fledged BGP speaker?". Although BGP is supposedly a
*protocol*, RFC4271 and its updates actually describe three components that go

> beyond a mere protocol: the BGP packet format, the BGP state machine, and the

Reviewer 2: How is the packet format not part of the protocol?

Routing Information Base. 

The specific required interaction of these components describe BGP's features,
they boil down to:

> "Listening" a.k.a "passively speaking" BGP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Listening", a.k.a "passively speaking" BGP
```

    - parsing BGP packets
    - opening and maintaining sessions with the BGP state machine

>     This would is the least amount of work a BGP function would need to do in

Reviewer 2: "This would is" is not correct.

>     This would is the least amount of work a BGP function would need to do in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This would be the least amount of work a BGP function would need to do in
```

    order to be accepted as a functioning part of a network routed with BGP.

Keeping State in RIBs called
    - `adj-RIB-in-pre/post`,
    - `loc-RIB`
    - `adj-RIB-out`

>     In order for a BGP function to conform to a IETF standards-compliant "BGP

Reviewer 2: to "an" IEFT standards-compliant?

>     In order for a BGP function to conform to a IETF standards-compliant "BGP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In order for a BGP function to conform to an IETF standards-compliant "BGP
```

    speaker" it would have to feature these RIBs, at least, "logically"
    (again, you guessed it, RFC4271).

"Speaking" BGP
    - performing best-path selection
    - propagating routes to peers

>     Based on the contents of its RIB-ins and its configured policies it should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Based on the contents of its RIB-ins and its configured policies, it should
```

    implement the best-path selection rules from RFC4271 and propagate the
    selected routes to its peers.

> These are the features, if implemented correctly, allow for an application to

Reviewer 2: "These are the features +++which+++, if implemented correctly, allow for ..."

> be a IETF standards compliant "BGP Speaker". As we stated before, though, a

Reviewer 2: "an IETF?

> be a IETF standards compliant "BGP Speaker". As we stated before, though, a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be an IETF standards-compliant "BGP Speaker". As we stated before, though, a
```

> BGP function does not have to implement all of them to ful fill their

Reviewer 2: "ful fill" -> "fulfill"

> BGP function does not have to implement all of them to ful fill their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BGP function does not have to implement all of them to fulfil their
```

> function. Even more so, for them to function correctly they don't have to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function. Even more so, for them to function correctly, they don't have to be
```

> standards compliant for all these features.

Reviewer 2: Elsewhere you say "standards-compliant" with the hyphen.

> standards compliant for all these features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
standards-compliant for all these features.
```

> It would be nice if the first feature, "speaking passively" is implemented

Reviewer 2: "speaking passively", <--- I there should be a comma here.

completely standards-compliant, since it would hamper the interaction with

> other BGP speakers if wasn't done compliant. Since it is valid for a BGP

Reviewer 2: "if wasn't done compliant" -> "if it wasn't compliant" ?

> other BGP speakers if wasn't done compliant. Since it is valid for a BGP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
other BGP speakers if it weren't done compliantly. Since it is valid for a BGP
```

speaker to have a (local) policy in place that discards all routes to
`adj-RIB-out`, a BGP speaker that never propagates any route could still be

> standards-compliant. From that it follows that such a BGP speaker will not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
standards-compliant. From that, it follows that such a BGP speaker will not
```

> have to engage in best-path selection, and in turn it wouldn't have to do any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have to engage in best-path selection, and in turn, it wouldn't have to do any
```

> state-keeping. Strictly speaking it would at that point not be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
state-keeping. Strictly speaking, it would at that point not be
```

> standards-compliant any more, but there would no way for an outside observer

Reviewer 2: "there would no" -> 'there would be no"

to establish its non-compliance. We shall see that many a BGP function does
indeed not require one or both of the "Keeping state" or "Speaking" features,

> hence the word "sub-set" in our definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hence the word "subset" in our definition.
```

Route Server
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A Route Server (as mentioned in RFC7947) would be a clear cut example

Reviewer 2: "clear cut" -> "clear-cut" ? https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/clear-cut

> A Route Server (as mentioned in RFC7947) would be a clear cut example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Route Server (as mentioned in RFC7947) would be a clear-cut example
```

> of a BGP function. A Route Server requires the 'speaking' features of the

Reviewer 2: 'speaking' -> 'Speaking' - consistency with above.

BGP protocol and the BGP state machine, but it does not require the best-path
selection mechanism, at least not in the form mentioned in RFC4271 and its
updates.

Route Reflector
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Likewise, a Route Reflector (RFC4456) serves a specific function in an iBGP

> network. Again, it requires the 'speaking' features fo the BGP protocol, but

Reviewer 2: Initial capital "Speaking".

> network. Again, it requires the 'speaking' features fo the BGP protocol, but

Reviewer 2: "fo the" -> "of the"

> network. Again, it requires the 'speaking' features fo the BGP protocol, but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
network. Again, it requires the 'speaking' features of the BGP protocol, but
```

it doesn't have to engage necessarily in best-path selection. Very simple

> Route Reflectors would not have a need for RIBS, they would just reflect the

Reviewer 2: "RIBS" -> "RIBs" ?

> announcements and withdrawals they receive to its iBGP peers.

Reviewer 2: "its" is inconsistent with "they", should it be "their" instead of "its"?

> announcements and withdrawals they receive to its iBGP peers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
announcements and withdrawals they receive to their iBGP peers.
```

Route Collector
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A Route Collector is, broadly speaking, a device that passively engages in BGP
sessions with the purpose of storing the learned routes together with
meta-data about the whereabouts of these routes. Some of the purposes of
storing these routes would be troubleshooting, and (longitudinal) analysis.

> "Engaging passively" may mean that the collector wil connect over BMP (BGP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Engaging passively" may mean that the collector will connect over BMP (BGP
```

Monitoring Protocol), out-of-band, with one or more BGP routers. In this case

> the collector, called 'BMP Station' (RFC7854), will **not** be a node in the

Reviewer 2: "called +++a+++ 'BMP Station'" ?

> BGP network. It will only requires the packet parsing features of BGP in order

Reviewer 2: "It will only requires" is not correct.

> BGP network. It will only requires the packet parsing features of BGP in order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BGP network. It will only require the packet parsing features of BGP in order
```

> to be able to extract the routes, and to be able to gather meta-data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to be able to extract the routes, and to be able to gather metadata. 
```

More commonly, though, Route Collectors **are** a node in the BGP network and
the collector tries to "speak passively". As we saw, though, a passive speaker
will have to engage in a minimum of speaking BGP. A Route Collector must never

> engage in best-path selection, or propagating routes to its peers whatsoever.

Reviewer 2: "or propagating" -> "or propagate" ?

> Therefore Route Collectors have no need for keeping state in RIBs as described

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, Route Collectors have no need for keeping state in RIBs as described
```

> in RFC4271. Indeed, Route Collectors may completely forego having RIBs, since

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in RFC4271. Indeed, Route Collectors may entirely forego having RIBs, since
```

they can be synthesized later from the stored routes and meta-data if need be.

Route Monitor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A Route Monitor is like a Route Collector in that it engages passively with
BGP speakers through BMP or "passive speaking". However, instead of or in

> addition to storing, it will send signals to other systems ad/or applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
addition to storing, it will send signals to other systems and/or applications
```

> based on certain user-defined events or combinations of (accumulated) events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
based on specific user-defined events or combinations of (accumulated) events
```

occurring in the observed BGP network. Some purposes would be troubleshooting,
post-mortem analysis and anomaly detection.

Off-line Looking Glass
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A looking glass is a command-line interface to a BGP speaker, quite often
publicly available, that allows the user to query the content of the RIBs
together with a few metrics. Many networks used to offer a web-interface that
offers data directly to these looking glasses, but security as well as

> availability concerns led to unwillingness to continue doing this. Instead BGP

Reviewer 2: So why does https://lg.twelve99.net/ exist?

Author: You're right, but this paragraph about LG is taking up too much space as it is (I already shortened it quite a bit), I am reluctant to elaborate. Maybe I'll just shove this whole paragraph into 'other functions'.

> availability concerns led to unwillingness to continue doing this. Instead BGP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
availability concerns led to unwillingness to continue doing this. Instead, BGP
```

data from the RIBs is collected from these routers into databases and made
available to users from there ("off-line").

> In order to collect data from the router the looking glass should be able to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to collect data from the router, the looking glass should be able to
```

support the "passively speaking" feature, or it should retrieve the data over
BMP. Other BGP features are not required.

Other Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are other numerous BGP functions that already exist in some shape or
form or that could be extracted from current practices, to name just a few:

- Route Provisioning
- Route Policy Engine
- RPKI injection Filter
- Edge Sanitation Filter ("Edge Lord")
- Route Optimizer

From BGP Function to BGP application
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All of the BGP functions mentioned here exist today, as hardware devices, or

> as software applications, be it open source or proprietary. Many of these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as software applications, be it open-source or proprietary. Many of these
```

applications, though, were not intended to be used for these BGP functions,
e.g. requiring patching, and/or requiring a multitude of applications, glued
together with ad-hoc code.

Rotonda aims to alleviate this by offering the user the tools, a framework if
you will, that allows users to build their own *BGP application* that may
perform one or multiple, combined BGP functions, without aforementioned
problems.

Secondly, Rotonda wants to be a tool that you can easily spin up to collect,
experiment with and analyze BGP (and related) data.

Thirdly, Rotonda aspires to lower the barrier to implement new, experimental

> BGP (and routing) features, not only by offering this already mentioned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BGP (and routing) features, not only by offering this already-mentioned
```
